1. List the commands for adding, updating, and deleting data.

CREATE - this will create a new table

INSTERT INTO - adds new data to a table

UPDATE - changes current data to new data

DELETE - deletes an entry from a table

ALTER TABLE - use this to add a new columnt of data

DROP TABLE - will delete a whole table

2. Explain the structure for each type of command. (see above)

3. What are some of the data types that can be used in tables? Give a real-world example of each type.

integer - the quantity of items you have in stock
character - if you use an abbreviation for a person's gender, M or F
boolean - true or false, for example if a person has a driver's licence would be true or false
decimal - a number with decimals, such as a person's weight
date - this can be a birthday
timestamp - this can be used to record the time an entry occured int eh database
array - for a collection of elements you want in one value cell, for example if you want to list all of a person's children names in one field

4. Decide how to create a new table to hold a list of people invited to a wedding dinner. The table needs to have first and last names, whether they sent in their RSVP, the number of guests they are bringing, and the number of meals (1 for adults and 1/2 for children).

    Which data type would you use to store each of the following pieces of information?
    First and last name.
    Whether they sent in their RSVP.
    Number of guests.
    Number of meals.
    Write a command that creates the table to track the wedding dinner.
    Write a command that adds a column to track whether the guest sent a thank you card.
    You have decided to move the data about the meals to another table, so write a command to remove the column storing the number meals from the wedding table.
    The guests will need a place to sit at the reception, so write a command that adds a column for table number.
    The wedding is over and we do not need to keep this information, so write a command that deletes the table numbers from the database.

CREATE TABLE wedding_guests (
    first text,
    last text,
    rsvp_received boolean,
    rsvp_response boolean,
    guests_number integer,
    meals_number numeric(1,1)
)

ALTER TABLE wedding_guests ADD COLUMN sent_thank_you boolean;

ALTER TABLE wedding_guests DROP COLUMN meals_number;

ALTER TABLE wedding_guests ADD COLUMN table_number integer;

ALTER TABLE wedding_guests DROP COLUMN table_number integer;

5. Write a command to create a new table to hold the books in a library with the columns ISBN, title, author, genre, publishing date, number of copies, and available copies.

    Find three books and add their information to the table.
    Someone has just checked out one of the books. Change the number of available copies to 1 fewer.
    Now one of the books has been added to the banned books list. Remove it from the table.

CREATE TABLE books (
    ISBN integer,
    title text,
    author text,
    genre text,
    publishing_date date,
    copies_quantity integer,
    copies_available integer
)

 INSERT INTO books (ISBN, title, author, genre, publishing_date, copies_quantity, copies_available)
  VALUES
    (9781338298406, "Tales From The Inner City", "Tan, Shaun", "Fiction", 2018, 5, 2),
    (9780312423773, "Shadow Baby", "McGhee, Alison", "Fiction", 2003, 5, 2),
    (9781338298406, "Notes From A Public Typewriter", "Anonymous", "Non Fiction", 2018, 4, 1);

UPDATE books 
    SET copies_available = copies_available - 1
    WHERE ISBN = 9781338298406;

DELETE
    FROM books 
    WHERE ISBN = 9780312423773;

6. Write a command to make a new table to hold spacecrafts. Information should include id, name, year launched, country of origin, a brief description of the mission, orbiting body, if it is currently operating, and its approximate miles from Earth. In addition to the table creation, provide commands that perform the following operations:

    Add three non-Earth-orbiting satellites to the table.
    Remove one of the satellites from the table since it has just crashed into the planet.
    Edit another satellite because it is no longer operating and change the value to reflect that.

CREATE TABLE spacecrafts (
    id integer,
    name text,
    year_launched date,
    country text,
    mission text,
    orbit_body text,
    operating boolean,
    miles float,
)

 INSERT INTO spacecrafts (id, name, year_launched, country, mission, orbit_body, operating, miles)
  VALUES
    (001, "ARTEMIS", 2007, "USA", "study energy releases from Earth's magnetosphere", "Earth's Moon", true,  238,900),
    (002, "BIRD", 2001, "Germany", "aquire invormation about leaf mass and photosynthesis, real time discrimination between smoke and water clouds", "Earth", false,  342),
    (003, "Mariner", 1969, "USA", "study survace and atmosphere of Mars through flybys", "Mars", false,  2,132);

DELETE 
    FROM spacecrafts
    WHERE id = 003;

UPDATE spacecrafts
    SET operating = false
    WHERE id = 001;

Write a command to create a new table to hold the emails in your inbox. This table should include an id, the subject line, the sender, any additional recipients, the body of the email, the timestamp, whether or not you have read the email, and the id of the email chain it's in. Also provide commands that perform the following operations:

Add three new emails to the inbox.
You deleted one of the emails, so write a command to remove the row from the inbox table.
You started reading an email but just heard a crash in another room. Mark the email as unread before investigating the crash, so you can come back and read it later.

CREATE TABLE inbox (
    id integer,
    subject text,
    sender text,
    additional_recipients text,
    body text,
    timestamp timestamp,
    read boolean,
    chain_id integer
);

 INSERT INTO inbox (id, subject, sender, additional_recipients, body, timestamp, read, chain_id)
  VALUES
    (1, "hello", "amy@email.com", "", "hello there, how are you?", '2008-10-29 14:56:59', true, 6),
    (2, "booya", "done@email.com", "amy@email.com", "are we done yet?", '2008-10-29 14:56:59', false, 7),
    (3, "finally", suzie@email.com", "", "ugh, getting there", '2008-10-29 14:56:59' false, 8);

DELETE 
    FROM inbox
    WHERE id = 3;

UPDATE inbox
    SET read = false
    WHERE id = 1;


